Another commonly utilized sample-based path planning method
is the randomly exploring random tree method,
or RRT for short.
RRT differs from PRM in that it is a single query planner.
If you recall, PRM spent its learning phase
building up a representation of the entire workspace.
This was computationally expensive,
but the resultant graph can be used for multiple queries.
RRT disregards the need for a comprehensive graph,
and built on a new for each individual query,
taking into account the start and goal positions as it does so.
This results in a much smaller,
but more directed graph with a faster computation time.
PRM is great for static environments,
where you can reuse the graph,
but certain environments change too quickly,
and the RRT method serves these environments well.
Let's see what the RRT method looks like.
We're path planning in the same environment as
before with the same start and goal configurations.
However, instead of adding these in the learning phase,
they will be explicitly considered from the start.
Then, we start to build up a representation of the workspace.
While the PRM built up a graph,
RRT will build a tree,
that is a type of graph where each node only has one parent.
In a single query planner,
you are only concerned about getting from start to goal.
The lack of lateral connections between
seemingly neighboring nodes is less of a concern as you will see.
So, what is the algorithm?
RRT will randomly generate a node,
say this one; then it will find its closest neighbor.
If the node is within a certain distance,
Delta of the neighbor,
then it can be connected directly, of course,
if the local planner determines the edge to be collision-free.
However, if a newly generated node is a far distance away from all other nodes,
then the chance of the edge between the node and
its nearest neighbor being collision-free is unlikely.
In such a case, instead of connecting to this node,
RRT will create a new node in the same direction,
but a distance Delta away.
Then this edge is checked for collisions,
and if it's in the clear,
the node is added to the tree.
Nodes can be generated by uniformly sampling the search space,
which would favor wide unexplored spaces, or alternatively,
some greediness can be introduced by increasing
the probability of sampling near the goal,
which would bias new samples in the direction of the goal.
Since RRT is a single query planner,
slight biasing is often favorable to introduce.
One variation of the RRT method is one that grows
two trees: one from the start and one from the goal.
RRT alternates growing each tree, and at every step,
it tries to build an edge between the most recently added node and the other tree.
Eventually, it succeeds.
RRT knows that a path has been found from start to goal.
This is a very simplified example of a workspace and
not a true representation of a problem that PRM or RRT would be tasked with solving.
PRM and RRT are exemplary performers in
multidimensional spaces for robots with many degrees of freedom.
In fact, they have been able to solve problems that
traditional path planning algorithms are unable to solve.